[Music]
the milky way galaxy is home to billions
of stars
many of which are larger brighter and
hotter than the sun
stars exist in a wealth of different
varieties
which drive their unrivaled sizes with
the scale ranging from stars the size of
jupiter
to stars larger than jupiter's orbit
around the sun
you've likely all seen pictures of the
latter various giant stars which
completely dwarf the sun
rendering it as nothing more than a
grain of sand next to a beast of the
cosmos
but how do we arrive at these
conclusions
how do we measure stars to identify
these mind-blowing sizes
and above all which of them is the
[Music]
biggest
a star is a massive luminous sphere of
mostly hydrogen and helium in a plasma
state
a kind of ultra-energetic soup of free
roaming atomic nuclei within a sea of
electrons
within the core of a star atoms are
under so much pressure from the body's
gravitational influence
that they are undergoing nuclear fusion
whereby the nuclei are stripped of their
electrons and crushed into one another
combining to produce heavier elements
for most of a star's life hydrogen atoms
are fused into helium atoms
like in our sun which converts some 600
million
tons of hydrogen into helium every
single second
this process generates an incredible
amount of outward pressure
which is counteracted by the star's
gravity keeping the body
held together so essentially a star is a
giant continuous explosion
but how does this explosion start
well to make a star the first thing you
need is gas
stars form inside gaseous clouds
containing large amounts of neutral
hydrogen and helium
which are two of the most abundant
elements in the universe
[Music]
within these gas clouds gravity attracts
whereby the atoms can pack tightly
enough to begin raising the temperature
at the core of the cloud eventually
the atoms at the center are so tightly
compressed that the pressure and energy
strips off the atom's electrons
creating ions and the exposed hydrogen
nuclei begin being crushed into one
another
thus igniting the star's fusion plasma
furnace
the fusion in the core of the star
forces the plasma outwards
increasing the star's size however
the body itself has gained so much mass
that it is generating an enormous
gravitational influence
lugging the plasma back in towards the
center
these inward and outward forces
counteract each other before settling
into a fragile balance of hydrostatic
equilibrium
where gravity and radiation pressure are
in equal measure
the edge of the star where this balance
is struck is marked by the photosphere
the outer surface from which light is
emitted
this is the edge we use to determine the
star's absolute radius
and thus its size when comparing other
stars
the value is often given in solar radii
a unit of measurement equivalent to the
radius of the sun
about 695 700 kilometers
this serves as an effective way to grasp
the bewildering sizes of the largest
stars
the size of a star depends largely on
its mass and a number of factors affect
how massive a star can become
particularly the amount and composition
of star star-forming gas
from which it came however
there is thought to be an upper bound
limit
for example you wouldn't find a star as
large as a galaxy
because it wouldn't be able to keep
itself held together
the energy output of fusion at the core
of a star scales with the star's mass
and so if a star is too massive then the
fusion will be too energetic
and gravity will not be able to hold on
to the star's structure
as it blows itself to smithereens
similarly molecular clouds from which
stars form need to be a certain mass
density and temperature in order to
collapse and begin star formation
when gas clouds collapse pockets of
greater density
fragment from the global structure of
the cloud
so instead of a gas cloud thousands of
times the mass of the sun producing one
hypergiant star
it is more likely to produce hundreds of
smaller ones instead
with these constraints in mind old
theoretical models have suggested
size limits of around 1 500 solar radii
for the largest possible stars
so that's 1 500 times the diameter of
the sun
that is a size difficult to comprehend
but what's even more surprising
is that since then we have discovered a
handful of stars which seem to sit
well above this incredible benchmark
so how does a star become this large
after a star has formed and its fusion
burning is underway
it enters what is known as its main
sequence
with the hydrogen in the core of the
star gradually being turned into helium
depending on the mass and composition of
the star this main sequence burning
phase can take anywhere from a few
million years in the most massive stars
to billions of years for more stable
stars like the sun
however stars do not vary that greatly
in size during their main sequence
the main stage hydrogen burning is the
coolest and thus
least energetic kind of fusion that a
star will undergo
and so does not produce as much outward
pressure as other kinds
it is only when a star begins fusing
elements heavier than hydrogen within
its core
that it enters a much larger and more
energetic phase of its life
at the end of a star's main sequence all
the hydrogen within the star's core has
been exhausted
and fused into helium helium fusion
requires much higher temperatures to
occur
and so initially the outward pressure
produced by the star lags
tipping the balance of the forces in
favor of gravity
causing the star to contract and shrink
however as the core contracts more
matter is pulled into the center
compressing the core further and heating
it up again
meanwhile gravity pulls the precious
little hydrogen remaining
in the outer layers of the star further
in towards the area of the core which is
hot enough for hydrogen fusion
this leftover hydrogen then wraps around
the helium center in a shell-like
structure
within which fusion resumes
the outer layers of the star then begin
absorbing the majority of this energy
causing the star to balloon in size to
tens or hundreds of times the size it
was during its main sequence
when this happens the surface area of
the star greatly increases
spreading the energy release more
sparsely across the surface
this causes the star's surface
temperature to fall to between 3000
and 5000 kelvin or so and appear redder
the star has become a red giant
thus the surface temperature of the star
falls but inside the core
the temperature again begins increasing
until the star reaches the threshold at
which the all helium core can be fused
into carbon
this significantly increases the energy
output
of the fusion causing the star to swell
up even more
in about 5 billion years or so the sun
will eventually exhaust its hydrogen
fuel and follow this process
expanding to over 250 times its current
diameter engulfing mercury
venus and probably the earth as well
however our sun is only a medium mass
star
which places limits on its fusion
when the sun has finished fusing helium
into carbon
it will not be able to reach the
temperature required to fuse anything
heavier
and will become unstable initially
growing larger
but ejecting around half of its mass
into a surrounding nebula
before becoming a small white dwarf star
in contrast stars much more massive than
the sun can reach the compression levels
required in their cause to fuse the
carbon leftover from helium fusion into
heavier elements still
like oxygen sulfur and even silicon
this generates even greater outward
pressure allowing the largest giant
stars to expand to billions
of kilometers in diameter
this is how stars become truly huge in
the twilight of their lives
red supergiant and hypergiant stars are
the largest type of star we see in the
galaxy
with some so large that they could
engulf our entire inner solar system
within their
spheres
to determine a star's radius we need to
know two key pieces of information
one which we can directly and easily
measure is its angular diameter
that is the size it appears when viewed
from the earth
the second and much more elusive value
is its distance from earth
when we know the two we can scale up the
angular diameter and we have our star's
actual size
but this is easier said than done as it
is very difficult to calculate stellar
distances precisely
even with space telescopes most stars
appear as nothing more than tiny
featureless dots of light due to their
immense interstellar distances
and also due to interstellar radiation
which hampers the light as it travels
towards earth
there are also other problems for
example many of the largest red giants
and supergiants are unstable
and expel large amounts of material into
their surrounding space
creating nebulae dust bubbles and even
radiating taurus-like structures which
obscure the star within
and unfortunately a great many of the
stars in the milky way galaxy are
impossible to see
altogether the light from the milky
way's core
drowns out a large number of stars
within the densely populated heart of
the galaxy
and similarly the dark dusty clouds
along its arms block out large swathes
of outlying stars
in short it is impossible to say what
the largest star in the universe
universes
or even the largest star in the galaxy
for that matter
but nevertheless we have managed to
identify our fair share of contenders
fortunately for the stars that are large
and local
their distances can be calculated
directly using a form of triangulation
also known as parallax
as shown in this demonstration when
moving from side to side
objects in the foreground appear to be
moving faster than background objects
and we can apply this phenomenon to the
stars
as earth orbits the sun its position
changes every half
year and so if we record the viewing
angles of a star every six months
we can use some trigonometry to work out
the distance based on the two positions
in practice this may not be done with
visible light from a star
but rather through very long baseline
radio emissions which are produced by
mazers
random spectral emissions generated by a
star's atmosphere
parallax allows us to measure
interstellar distances with a great
degree of accuracy
but it only really works for nearby
large and luminous red giants
for smaller or more distant stars the
displacement of the object's emissions
against the backdrop of space becomes
too subtle
and standard parallax techniques have
margins of error too large for the
estimations to be meaningful
as such we can only survey stars through
parallax measurements accurately
out to a distance of about 400 light
years
not a very useful sample size when
trying to find the largest star in the
galaxy
however all is not lost there are other
means to determine the distance of a
star
albeit in direct means but because we
have a selection
of nearby stars that we can measure
precisely through parallax
this gives us a dictionary of known
stars whose well-understood properties
can be used to deduce the
characteristics of more remote stars
by comparing the spectral data of
distant stars with the spectrums of
stars whose properties we know
we can estimate the two things we need
to find the radius of the star
the luminosity and surface temperature
a star's luminosity is its intrinsic
brightness
not how bright it appears from the earth
but rather a measure for the amount of
electromagnetic energy that is being
emitted in watts
when dealing with other stars we measure
this in terms of solar luminosity
the energy output of the sun given by
the international astronomical union to
be about 3.828 times 10 to the power of
26 watts
because the most remote stars are too
far away to take direct spectral
measurements
astronomers instead take measurements of
the star's emissions at different
wavelengths
and then reproduce a spectrum that would
best fit the data recorded
once we have recreated our spectrum by
measuring the width of certain
absorption lines
it is possible to assign a spectral
class to the star
the luminosity and temperature we can
then infer from no nearby stars of same
spectral type
certain spectral types are indicative of
cooler red giants
with surface temperatures of around 5000
kelvin or lower
whereas other types are indicative of
hot blue stars burning at tens or
hundreds of thousands of kelvin
in truth there is a lot of guesswork and
there are a number of variable factors
which makes some data harder to predict
but once we have estimates for the
luminosity and temperature of a distant
star
we can apply these values to the
equation used to deduce stellar
luminosity
based on the surface area and
temperature of said star
by doing a bit of algebra we can extract
the radius from the surface area
and rearrange the equation to solve for
the radius of the star
[Music]
and finally with all these values
plugged in we arrive at an estimate for
the star's size
[Music]
so with all that said and done what are
the largest stars that we found
for a time it was thought that vy canis
maduris was the largest star
callus maduris is a red hypergiant
oxygen-rich pulsating variable star
located in the constellation of canis
major
its distance is thought to be around 3
900 light years from the earth
and it is thought to be located either
within or slightly in the foreground
of a large molecular cloud known as
sh2310
one of the largest star-forming regions
in the milky way
and consequently home to many giant
stars
canis majiris is the largest and
brightest of them all
it is extremely luminous even for a red
supergiant owing to a heated disc or
bubble around the star which gives off a
high infrared excess
the star was first noted as early as
and it continued to be observed
throughout the century
by the start of the 1900s it was
accepted that the star was an extreme
object
and during this time astronomers had
noted no less than six distinct bright
patches around the star
leading to the hypothesis that it may be
a binary star system or even larger
by the end of the 20th century it was
known to be a post-main sequence red
supergiant star
and we now know that the bright
components observed are part of a highly
reflective surrounding
asymmetric nebula caused by explosions
and jets from the star's photosphere
canis majiris is in the final stages of
its life
and it is losing a lot of its mass as it
fuses oxygen and other heavy elements
within its core
much of the mass ejection is thought to
have happened fairly recently
within the last millennium or so and it
is indicative that the star does not
have long left
before it goes supernova
estimates of the star's size have varied
over the decades due to its uncertain
distance
and also due to the fact that it is a
variable star which changes in size as
it pulses
studies in the late 90s suggested a
distance of around 1
800 light years thus implying a smaller
radius
but more recent and accurate studies
have yielded distances closer to 4 000
light years
in 2006 and then again in 2007
it was estimated to be somewhere in the
region of 1800 solar radii
making it a hyper giant star as well as
the largest known star at the time
today its radius has been more
accurately measured to be around 1
420 solar radii but
even at this size it would be
sufficiently large as to engulf the
orbit of jupiter
some 750 million kilometers away from
the sun
[Music]
of the few stars that are believed to
rank above canis majeuris
ui scooty is probably the most well
known
spending much of the last decade as the
largest known star
like the former ui scooty is a pulsating
variable red supergiant star
which is located in the constellation of
scutum
it is not visible to the naked eye and
even appears faintly to telescopes
due to its location within the milky
way's zone of avoidance
the section of the galaxy whose stars
are obscured by the light from the
galactic core
in addition the star pulses every two
years or so
and is shedding much of its mass making
accurate estimations difficult to
constrain
in 2013 ui scooty's distance was
estimated to be around nine or ten
thousand light years away from the earth
yielding a mind-blowing size of around 1
700 solar radii give or take about 200
to account for margins of error
like canis majuris this size is enough
to engulf the orbit of jupiter when
placed at the center of the solar system
and photons traveling at light speed
would take around
seven hours to travel along its
circumference
compared to the 14 and a half seconds
they would require to
circle the sun like many other
supergiant stars
ui scooty is shedding a lot of its
material and blasting away its outer
layers
as it fuses heavier elements within its
core and inevitably it will go supernova
soon because of its location deep within
the galactic disk
it may be a metal rich star if this is
the case then instead of going supernova
by fusing iron and collapsing
it may instead reach a hotter
temperature before death
possibly evolving into either a yellow
hypergiant
luminous blue hypergiant or perhaps a
wolf reyes star
a kind of very hot and very volatile
star with a high metal content in all
three cases the star will produce
strong eruptive stellar wind emissions
so powerful that they will blow the
outer layers of the star away and expose
the core
causing a much brighter and more violent
kind of supernova
however the star ends its life it spells
bad news for any planetary system
orbiting the beast
like the sun ui scooty may have a system
of planets
many times larger than the solar system
due to the star's tremendous size
ui scooty's habitable zone the distance
from the star at which water could exist
on the surface of a planet
is thought to start at over 600
astronomical units away from the surface
which would mean any life on a planet
like this would experience
seasons that lasted for millennia
in reality it is unlikely that anything
is around to witness the star up close
as the constant ejections of mass and
radiation from ui scooty's dying breaths
will have rendered all but the most
remote planets uninhabitable
the star's eventual supernova would send
this planetary system
into further disarray likely
obliterating most of the planets
and perhaps ejecting very distant ones
on a trajectory
out of the system casting them into the
wilds of the galaxy as starless rogue
planets
in 2018 data from the esa's gaia
spacecraft re-evaluated ui scooty's
distance using parallax measurements
giving a much lower distance of around
5000 light years
which would correspond to a radius of
only 755
solar radii still enormous but not big
enough to be record-breaking
however as we said earlier parallax
measurements are less reliable for the
very distant objects
and until further tests are done to
validate the finding
this lower distance and thus lower
radius for ui scuti
remains tentative
ui scooty was the king of stars for many
years
but after the gaia data release cast
doubt over its true size
the throne was once again opened for a
new stellar champion
and though there have been a few
proposed stars with larger diameters
than ui scooty
one stands out as by far the largest
beast discovered to date
enter the latest and new largest known
star
stevenson 2 18.
stevenson 218 is located within the
constellation of scutum
the same as ui scooty but lying
significantly further away
around 19 000 light-years from the earth
it lies within a densely populated
star-forming region
home to several massive open clusters
each containing their own
enormous red giant and supergiant stars
rs gc2 aka stevenson 2
is one such open cluster estimated to be
around 20 000 light years distant
and containing more than two dozen red
supergiants
stevenson 218 lies within this area and
it is the brightest star among them
but it was not initially considered to
be a member of the cluster
due to its outlying position and also
its abnormally high luminosity when
compared to other cluster constituents
however a later study concluded that the
star was perhaps part of an outlying
group of stars to the cluster
which is thought to lie at a similar
distance to the rest of it
thus stevenson 218 had its name assigned
as a member of the cluster
however it stands out from its
neighboring giants being both
significantly larger
and more luminous than its surroundings
assuming that the star lies at a similar
distance to the rest of the cluster
then its luminosity is thought to be
around 440
000 times that of our sun far
above the theoretical luminosity limit
for most stars which was once believed
to be around 320
000 solar luminosities corresponding to
the 1
500 solar radii size limits we spoke
about earlier
but by applying stevenson 218's observed
properties to the luminosity formula
they correspond to a staggering radius
of 2149 solar radii
making stevenson 218 by far the largest
star discovered yet
and the first whose photosphere when
replacing the sun would be capable of
engulfing not just the orbits of jupiter
but the orbit of saturn as well which
lies almost 10 times further away from
the sun than earth does this corresponds
to a volume
of almost 10 billion times that of our
sun
and it's hard to appreciate just how
large that truly is
but what is even more bewildering is the
fact that it may get larger still
as it ages stevenson 218 is thought to
be a relatively young star
and the older it gets the hotter it will
burn
perhaps swelling further and evolving
into a yellow hypergiant before it goes
supernova
in any case it is considerably larger
than both ui scooty and canis maduris
and is by far the largest node star in
the local group
over the years we have continually found
larger and larger
stars and so it's reasonable to assume
that something else will come along
and knock stevenson 218 off the top of
the list before long
but make no mistake it will take
something truly remarkable to knock this
monster
off its pedestal as king of the cosmos
[Music]
you